Vyeboom - The migration towards digital broadcasting will improve television coverage in the rural village of Vyeboom in Limpopo, says Communications Minister Faith Muthambi. Residents who do not have television decoders said on Sunday they struggled to access free to air television stations due to poor signal. “Digital migration will improve tv coverage in the Vuwani area, and Vyeboom in particular. Cabinet has approved that government will provide free set-top-boxes to the five million poor tv-owning households,” said the Minister, who was speaking during a Youth Month Imbizo under the theme, “Youth Moving South Africa Forward”. She said this was a reflection of government’s commitment to ensuring that the migration from analogue to digital broadcasting happens within the shortest time possible. With high poverty levels in the Vyeboom and surrounding areas, most households rely on social grants. The nearest town, Vuwani, is about 10km away. Minister Muthambi on Sunday described Vyeboom as a trailblazer as it was the place where the Department of Communications was holding its first Youth Month Imbizo. During June, the country observes the anniversary of the 16 June 1976 youth uprisings against the apartheid regime. She told residents who attended the Imbizo in large numbers that the department will soon launch an awareness campaign to educate the public about the implementation of digital migration “We will work with our local traditional leaders in implementing the digital migration awareness campaign,” she said. Residents told Minister Muthambi, who was accompanied by local traditional leaders including Khosi Vho-Nthumeni Masia, they are often faced with water shortages. Some youths also raised their concern at the poor mobile network coverage as well as the unavailability of a computer laboratory with internet. Tshimangadzo Mudau, 25, who studied Auxiliary Nursing at Gem Healthcare Nursing Training College in Johannesburg said: “I am unemployed, there is no internet café and if we want to apply for jobs online, we have to go to Vuwani. Sometimes we even have to travel to Thohoyandou which is a challenge because we don’t have money for a taxi.” Her sentiments were echoed by Lindelani Tsera, 18, who called for a computer laboratory with internet connectivity. “We are tired of travelling long distances just to access the internet.” Minister Muthambi said she would visit the village in three months to give residents feedback on the issues they had raised. Makhado Municipal Mayor, David Mutavhatsindi, meanwhile used the platform to assure residents that the gravel road which links them to the Davhana village will be tarred. “As a municipality, we know your concern regarding this gravel road… We will make sure that the road is tarred…..we will also make sure that all households in the village are electrified,” he said. – SAnews.gov.za