Pretoria - The National Student Financial Aid Scheme (NSFAS) has opened online applications for 2016 financial aid for poor and deserving students. In a statement on Friday, NSFAS said applications opened on 17 August and will close on 30 November. The applications for funding are currently open for students wishing to study at selected public universities and Technical Vocational Education and Training (TVET) colleges. Grade 12 learners and students can now log on to the NSFAS website on www.nsfas.org.za to apply and submit applications. “In 2014, we focused more on testing and improving the student centered model. The results were positive, hence we are implementing the model. “We hope the new funding model will change their lives for the better by creating an effective and efficient access to higher education,” said NSFAS spokesperson Kagisho Mamabolo. He urged applicants to provide supporting documents, full and accurate information to avoid rejection of applications. Grade 12 learners from poor and working class families who cannot afford to pay for their studies; eligible students who were not funded in the previous years and eligible students who were funded in the previous years, but not funded in 2015 may apply for funding from NSFAS. The selected universities where students can enrol include the University of South Africa; Durban University of Technology; Nelson Mandela Metropolitan University; University of Venda; Sol Plaatjie University and the University of Mpumalanga. Students can also enrol at King Hintsa TVET College; Motheo TVET College; Umfolozi TVET College; South Cape TVET College and Ekhurhuleni East College. “NSFAS students funded for 2015 need not to apply. However, NSFAS will obtain academic results to assess their eligibility for the continued funding in the 2016 academic year,” said the NSFAS. To apply, students are encouraged to complete an online application form and submit relevant supporting documents before the closing date online. The closing date for students wishing to study at UNISA will close on 30 September 2015 to allow NSFAS to process and evaluate UNISA applicants in time for the early registration phase. NSFAS will announce outcome of applications via SMS or email after the closing dates. For further assistance, applicants can contact NSFAS contact centre on 0860 067 327.-SAnews.gov.za