Pretoria – Residents of Volsoorus and Palm Ridge have welcomed the opening of two new state-of-the-art clinics, saying they already feel better the minute they walk into the facilities. The Ekurhuleni Metropolitan Municipality opened the two fully-fledged modern clinics, Tswelopele Clinic in Vosloorus and Palm Ridge Clinic, to alleviate overcrowding and improve primary health care in the area. In just a week of opening, the new Tswelopele Clinic has seen over 670 patients while the one month Palm Ridge Clinic has attended to over 6 000 patients. According to Palm Ridge resident Phumla Chebane, healthcare centres are a place that should give one assurance that their ailments will be attended to and that they will return home satisfied by the service they received. “The new clinic is exactly that. The state of the old Palm Ridge clinic never inspired hope. However, when I visit the new clinic I already feel better when I step in. “There is a larger waiting area with benches for us to sit while we wait for a nurse to attend to us and I am comfortable with my child playing around because it is cleaner," said Chebane. Clinic Head at Tswelopele Clinic, Nomtha Mengwayi, said she was very excited about the new clinic mostly because patients will have more privacy as separate rooms will be used for different functions. "Previously one office was used as an emergency room and a doctor's consultation room, which at times limited the number of services provided at the facility,” said Mengwayi. Municipal spokesperson Themba Gadebe highlighted that the most common challenge that was experienced at both facilities was the lack of space, which also inhibited the healthcare providers' ability to provide quality services. “Improved primary health care services are a necessity that has the potential to prevent hospital admissions when community members receive adequate assistance,” said Gadebe. He added that the municipality is currently in the process of constructing eight more clinics to continue enhancing resident's primary health care facilities. The clinics include Motsamai Clinic in Katlehong, Villa Lisa Clinic in Vosloorus, Dukathole Clinic in Germiston, Khumalo Clinic in Katlehong, Tsietsi Clinic in Katlehong, Crystal Park Clinic in Benoni, Selope Thema in Kwa-Thema and Esangweni Clinic in Tembisa. – SAnews.gov.za